New blog post: sail operator GA (#16332)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2025/sail-operator-ga/index.md

---

> title: "Sail operator 1.0.0 has been released: manage Istio with an operator"

Reviewer: per https://istio.io/latest/blog/2024/introducing-sail-operator/ and https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator, it's "Sail Operator" throughout

Reviewer: (Please make sure Istio is capitalized where appropriate too, in case I missed any)

> title: "Sail operator 1.0.0 has been released: manage Istio with an operator"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Sail Operator 1.0.0 released: manage Istio with an operator"
```

> description: Sail Operator 1.0.0 released, a project part of the istio-ecosystem organization. Let's dive in into the basics of the Sail Operator and let's run an example to show how easy it is to manage Istio with it.

Reviewer: see https://deploy-preview-16332--preliminary-istio.netlify.app/latest/blog/2025/sail-operator-ga/ - this is too long

```suggestion
description: Dive in into the basics of the Sail Operator and check out an example to see how easy it is to use it to manage Istio.
```

publishdate: 2025-03-19
attribution: "Francisco Herrera - Red Hat"
keywords: [istio,operator,sail,incluster,istiooperator]
---

> The Sail operator is GA with a clear mission: to simplify and streamline Istio management in your cluster. By using the Kubernetes operator pattern, Sail operator aims to add new value to istio by improving the upgrade process.

Reviewer: Probably want to start with an overview/recap of what the Sail Operator is and a link back to https://istio.io/latest/blog/2024/introducing-sail-operator/

```suggestion
The [Sail Operator](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator) is a community project launched by Red Hat to build a modern [operator](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/containers/what-is-a-kubernetes-operator) for Istio. [First announced in August 2024](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator) we are pleased to announce Sail Operator is now GA with a clear mission: to simplify and streamline Istio management in your cluster..
```

> ## Simplified Deployment & Management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Simplified deployment & management
```

> The Sail operator is engineered to cut down the complexity of installing and running Istio. It automates manual tasks, ensuring a consistent, reliable, and uncomplicated experience from initial installation to ongoing maintenance and upgrades of Istio versions in your cluster. Besides this, the Sail operator APIs are built around Istio’s Helm chart APIs, which means that all the istio configurations are available through the Sail Operator CRDs’ values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sail Operator is engineered to cut down the complexity of installing and running Istio. It automates manual tasks, ensuring a consistent, reliable, and uncomplicated experience from initial installation to ongoing maintenance and upgrades of Istio versions in your cluster. The Sail Operator APIs are built around Istio’s Helm chart APIs, which means that all the istio configurations are available through the Sail Operator CRD’s values.
```

> We encourage users to go through our live [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs) to learn more about this new way to manage your istio control plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We encourage users to go through our [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs) to learn more about this new way to manage your Istio environment.
```

> The main resources that are part of the Sail operator are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main resources that are part of the Sail Operator are:
```

* `Istio`: manages your istio control plane.
* `IstioRevision`: it represents a revision of the control plane.

> * `IstioRevisionTag`: resource represents a stable Revision Tag, which functions as an alias for Istio control plane revisions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `IstioRevisionTag`: resource represents a stable revision tag, which functions as an alias for Istio control plane revisions.
```

* `IstioCNI`: Istio's CNI plugin resource.

> * `ZTunnel`: ambient mode Ztunnel DaemonSet (alpha feature).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `ZTunnel`: ambient mode ztunnel `DaemonSet` (alpha feature).
```

> * `Istio`: manages your istio control plane.
> * `IstioRevision`: it represents a revision of the control plane.
> * `IstioRevisionTag`: resource represents a stable revision tag, which functions as an alias for Istio control plane revisions.
> * `IstioCNI`: Istio's CNI plugin resource.
> * `ZTunnel`: ambient mode ztunnel `DaemonSet` (alpha feature).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Istio`: manages an Istio control plane.
* `IstioRevision`: represents a revision of the control plane.
* `IstioRevisionTag`: represents a stable revision tag, which functions as an alias for an Istio control plane revision.
* `IstioCNI`: manages Istio's CNI node agent.
* `ZTunnel`: manage the ambient mode ztunnel DaemonSet (Alpha feature).
```

confirm this is ZTunnel with a capital Z and T?  We don't usually spell it that way.

> Note that if you are migrating from the (now deprecated and deleted) In-Cluster Istio operator, you can check this section in our [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#migrating-from-istio-in-cluster-operator) where we explain the equivalence of resources, or you can also try our [resource converter](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#converter-script) to easily convert your IstioOperator resource to an Istio resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that if you are migrating from the (now deprecated and deleted) In-Cluster Istio operator, you can check this section in our [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#migrating-from-istio-in-cluster-operator) where we explain the equivalence of resources, or you can also try our [resource converter](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#converter-script) to easily convert your `IstioOperator` resource to an `Istio` resource.
```

> Note that if you are migrating from the (now deprecated and deleted) In-Cluster Istio operator, you can check this section in our [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#migrating-from-istio-in-cluster-operator) where we explain the equivalence of resources, or you can also try our [resource converter](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#converter-script) to easily convert your `IstioOperator` resource to an `Istio` resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< idea >}}
If you are migrating from the [since-removed Istio in-cluster operator](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2024/in-cluster-operator-deprecation-announcement/), you can check this section in our [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#migrating-from-istio-in-cluster-operator) where we explain the equivalence of resources, or you can also try our [resource converter](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#converter-script) to easily convert your `IstioOperator` resource to an `Istio` resource.
{{< /idea >}}
```

> ## Main Features and support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Main features and support
```

- Each component of the Istio control plane is managed independently by the Sail Operator through dedicated Kubernetes Custom Resources (CRs). The Sail Operator provides separate CRDs for components such as `Istio`, `IstioCNI`, and `ZTunnel`, allowing you to configure, manage, and upgrade them individually. Additionally, there are CRDs for `IstioRevision` and `IstioRevisionTag` to manage Istio control plane revisions.

> - Support for multiple Istio versions. Currently the 1.0.0 version supports: 1.24.3, 1.24.2, 1.24.1, 1.23.5, 1.23.4, 1.23.3, 1.23.0.

Reviewer: not 1.25?

Author: Hi, when we set everything for `1.0.0` version, `v1.25` was not out yet. So, will be added in a next release

- Two update strategies are supported: `InPlace` and `RevisionBased`. Check our documentation for more information about the update types supported.
- Support for multicluster Istio [deployment models](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/): multi-primary, primary-remote, external control plane. More information and examples in our [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/README.md#multi-cluster).

> - Ambient is alpha: check our specific [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/common/istio-ambient-mode.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ambient mode support is Alpha: check our specific [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/common/istio-ambient-mode.md).
```

> - Addons are managed separately from the Sail Operator. They can be easily integrated with the Sail operator, you can check this section for the [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/README.md#addons) for examples and more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Addons are managed separately from the Sail Operator. They can be easily integrated with the Sail Operator, check this section for the [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/README.md#addons) for examples and more information.
```

> ## Why Now?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why now?
```

> As cloud-native architectures continue to evolve, a robust and user-friendly operator for Istio is more essential than ever. The Sail Operator offers developers and operations teams a consistent, secure, and efficient solution that feels familiar to those used to working with operators. Its GA release signals a mature solution, ready to support even the most demanding production environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As cloud native architectures continue to evolve, we feel a robust and user-friendly operator for Istio is more essential than ever. The Sail Operator offers developers and operations teams a consistent, secure, and efficient solution that feels familiar to those used to working with operators. Its GA release signals a mature solution, ready to support even the most demanding production environments.
```

> ## Try it out

Reviewer: Example content in blogs ages poorly for things which can end up having high SEO.  Have you considered having this live somewhere in your docs and just be pointed to by here?

Author: Yes, it can be a good way to keep the example up-to-date, but I was trying to give an example to get the attention of the users reading the blog post directly. Let me check the best way to move this example to the docs

Author: I changed the entire `Try it out` section pointing to our example in the docs

Reviewer: TBH (and with my apologies), what is left is half way. Right now you're only demonstrating installing, which is just a Helm command, and shows nothing about how easy Sail Operator is to use.  I would either add it back, or remove the code entirely, in favour of the "Do you want to.." and below.

Author: I'll add it back, the example will always work for the specific version `1.0.0`. Maybe add a note to visit the Sail page to check the latest version and updated documentation in case to want to try the latest features

Author: Hi, I added the example back and also a Note to point to the latest release version as an example in case this post has traffic when a new version is out

> Do you want to try our operator?
> Going over this example will show you how to safely do an update of your istio control plane by using the revision-based upgrade strategy, this means you will have two Istio control planes running at the same time, allowing you to migrate workloads easily, minimizing the risk of traffic disruptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Would you like to try out Sail Operator?
This example will show you how to safely do an update of your Istio control plane by using the revision-based upgrade strategy. This means you will have two Istio control planes running at the same time, allowing you to migrate workloads easily, minimizing the risk of traffic disruptions.
```

Prerequisites:
- Running cluster
- Helm
- Kubectl
- Istioctl

> ### Install the operator from the sail operator helm repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install the operator from the Sail Operator Helm repository
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm repo add sail-operator https://istio-ecosystem.github.io/sail-operator
$ helm repo update
$ kubectl create namespace sail-operator
$ helm install sail-operator sail-operator/sail-operator --version 1.0.0 -n sail-operator
{{< /text >}}

The operator is now installed in your cluster:

{{< text plain >}}
NAME: sail-operator
LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar 18 12:00:46 2025
NAMESPACE: sail-operator
STATUS: deployed
REVISION: 1
TEST SUITE: None
{{< /text >}}

### Ensure the operator pod is running

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pods -n sail-operator
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
sail-operator-56bf994f49-j67ft   1/1     Running   0          87s
{{< /text >}}

> #### Create an Istio resource with istio version 1.24.2 and a Istio revision tag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create an Istio resource with Istio v1.24.2 and a revision tag
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl create ns istio-system
$ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f-
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: Istio
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: istio-system
  updateStrategy:
    type: RevisionBased
    inactiveRevisionDeletionGracePeriodSeconds: 30
  version: v1.24.2
---
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioRevisionTag
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Istio
    name: default
EOF
{{< /text >}}

Note that the `IstioRevisionTag` has a target reference to the `Istio` resource with the name `default`.

Check the state of the resources created:
- `istiod` pods are running

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
> {{< /text >}}
> 
> {{< text plain >}}
> NAME                                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
> istiod-default-v1-24-2-bd8458c4-jl8zm   1/1     Running   0          3m45s
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
    {{< /text >}}

    {{< text plain >}}
    NAME                                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
    istiod-default-v1-24-2-bd8458c4-jl8zm   1/1     Running   0          3m45s
    {{< /text >}}
```

- `Istio` resource created

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl get istio
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get istio
    {{< /text >}}
```

> {{< text plain >}}
> NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE
> default   1           1       1        default-v1-24-2   Healthy   v1.24.2   4m27s
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{< text plain >}}
    NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE
    default   1           1       1        default-v1-24-2   Healthy   v1.24.2   4m27s
    {{< /text >}}
```

- `IstioRevisionTag` resource created

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl get istiorevisiontag
> {{< /text >}}
> 
> {{< text plain >}}
> NAME      STATUS                    IN USE   REVISION          AGE
> default   NotReferencedByAnything   False    default-v1-24-2   4m43s
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get istiorevisiontag
    {{< /text >}}

    {{< text plain >}}
    NAME      STATUS                    IN USE   REVISION          AGE
    default   NotReferencedByAnything   False    default-v1-24-2   4m43s
    {{< /text >}}
```

> Note that the `IstioRevisionTag` status is `NotReferencedByAnything`, this is because there are currently no resources using the revision `default-v1-24-2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the `IstioRevisionTag` status is `NotReferencedByAnything`. This is because there are currently no resources using the revision `default-v1-24-2`.
```

### Deploy sample application

> - Create a namespace and label it to enable istio injection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a namespace and label it to enable Istio injection:
```

> - Create a namespace and label it to enable istio injection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a namespace and label it to enable istio injection
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl create namespace sample
$ kubectl label namespace sample istio-injection=enabled
{{< /text >}}

> After labeling the namespace you will see that the `IstioRevisionTag` resource status will change to In Use true, this is because there is now a resource using the revision `default-v1-24-2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After labeling the namespace you will see that the `IstioRevisionTag` resource status will change to 'In Use: True', because there is now a resource using the revision `default-v1-24-2`.
```

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl get istiorevisiontag
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get istiorevisiontag
    {{< /text >}}
```

> {{< text plain >}}
> NAME      STATUS    IN USE   REVISION          AGE
> default   Healthy   True     default-v1-24-2   6m24s
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{< text plain >}}
    NAME      STATUS    IN USE   REVISION          AGE
    default   Healthy   True     default-v1-24-2   6m24s
    {{< /text >}}
```

> - Deploy the sample application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy the sample application:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f {{< github_file >}}/samples/sleep/sleep.yaml -n sample
{{< /text >}}

> - Confirm istio proxy version of the sample app match the control plane version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm the proxy version of the sample app matches the control plane version:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl proxy-status
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                              CLUSTER        CDS              LDS              EDS              RDS              ECDS        ISTIOD                                    VERSION
sleep-5fcd8fd6c8-q4c9x.sample     Kubernetes     SYNCED (78s)     SYNCED (78s)     SYNCED (78s)     SYNCED (78s)     IGNORED     istiod-default-v1-24-2-bd8458c4-jl8zm     1.24.2
{{< /text >}}

#### Upgrade the Istio control plane to version 1.24.3

> - Update the `Istio` resource with the new version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the `Istio` resource with the new version:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl patch istio default -n istio-system --type='merge' -p '{"spec":{"version":"v1.24.3"}}'
{{< /text >}}

> - Check the `Istio` resource, you will see that there are two revisions and there are two `Istio` ready

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the `Istio` resource. You will see that there are two revisions and they are both 'ready':
```

if this is correct

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istio
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE
default   2           2       2        default-v1-24-3   Healthy   v1.24.3   10m
{{< /text >}}

> - The `IstioRevisiontag` now references the new revision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `IstioRevisiontag` now references the new revision:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istiorevisiontag
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME      STATUS    IN USE   REVISION          AGE
default   Healthy   True     default-v1-24-3   11m
{{< /text >}}

> - There are two `IstioRevisions`, one for each istio version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two `IstioRevisions`, one for each Istio version:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istiorevision
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME              TYPE   READY   STATUS    IN USE   VERSION   AGE
default-v1-24-2          True    Healthy   True     v1.24.2   11m
default-v1-24-3          True    Healthy   True     v1.24.3   92s
{{< /text >}}

The Sail Operator automatically detects whether a given Istio control plane is being used and writes this information in the "In Use" status condition that you see above. Right now, all `IstioRevisions` and our `IstioRevisionTag` are considered "In Use":

> * The old revision `default-v1-24-2` is considered in use because it is referenced by the sample application’s sidecar

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The old revision `default-v1-24-2` is considered in use because it is referenced by the sample application’s sidecar.
```

Consistency.

* The new revision `default-v1-24-3` is considered in use because it is referenced by the tag.
* The tag is considered in use because it is referenced by the sample namespace.

> - Confirm there are two control plane pods running, one for each revision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm there are two control plane pods running, one for each revision:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
istiod-default-v1-24-2-bd8458c4-jl8zm     1/1     Running   0          16m
istiod-default-v1-24-3-68df97dfbb-v7ndm   1/1     Running   0          6m32s
{{< /text >}}

> - Confirm the proxy sidecar version remains the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm the proxy sidecar version remains the same:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl proxy-status
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                              CLUSTER        CDS                LDS                EDS                RDS                ECDS        ISTIOD                                    VERSION
sleep-5fcd8fd6c8-q4c9x.sample     Kubernetes     SYNCED (6m40s)     SYNCED (6m40s)     SYNCED (6m40s)     SYNCED (6m40s)     IGNORED     istiod-default-v1-24-2-bd8458c4-jl8zm     1.24.2
{{< /text >}}

> - Restart the sample pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restart the sample pod:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl rollout restart deployment -n sample
{{< /text >}}

> - Confirm the proxy sidecar version is updated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm the proxy sidecar version is updated:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl proxy-status
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                              CLUSTER        CDS              LDS              EDS              RDS              ECDS        ISTIOD                                      VERSION
sleep-6f87fcf556-k9nh9.sample     Kubernetes     SYNCED (29s)     SYNCED (29s)     SYNCED (29s)     SYNCED (29s)     IGNORED     istiod-default-v1-24-3-68df97dfbb-v7ndm     1.24.3
{{< /text >}}

> - When an `IstioRevision` is no longer in use and is not the active revision of an `Istio` resource (for example, when it is not the version that is set in the `spec.version` field), the Sail Operator will delete it after a grace period, which defaults to 30 seconds. Confirm the deletion of the old control plane and `IstioRevision`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an `IstioRevision` is no longer in use and is not the active revision of an `Istio` resource (for example, when it is not the version that is set in the `spec.version` field), the Sail Operator will delete it after a grace period, which defaults to 30 seconds. Confirm the deletion of the old control plane and `IstioRevision`:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
istiod-default-v1-24-3-68df97dfbb-v7ndm   1/1     Running   0          10m
{{< /text >}}

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istiorevision
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME              TYPE   READY   STATUS    IN USE   VERSION   AGE
default-v1-24-3          True    Healthy   True     v1.24.3   13m
{{< /text >}}

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istio
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE
default   1           1       1        default-v1-24-3   Healthy   v1.24.3   24m
{{< /text >}}

## Conclusion

> The Sail Operator automates manual tasks, ensuring a consistent, reliable, and uncomplicated experience from initial installation to ongoing maintenance and upgrades of Istio in your cluster. The Sail Operator is an istio-ecosystem project, and we encourage you to try it out and provide feedback to help us improve it, you can check our contribution guide [here](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information about how to contribute to the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sail Operator automates manual tasks, ensuring a consistent, reliable, and uncomplicated experience from initial installation to ongoing maintenance and upgrades of Istio in your cluster. The Sail Operator is an [istio-ecosystem ](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem)project, and we encourage you to try it out and provide feedback to help us improve it, you can check our [contribution guide](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information about how to contribute to the project.
```

We encourage users to go through our live [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs) to help you easily get deep into this new way to manage your istio control plane.

The main resources that are part of the Sail operator are:
* `Istio`: manages your istio control plane.
* `IstioRevision`: it represents a revision of the control plane.
* `IstioRevisionTag`: resource represents a stable Revision Tag, which functions as an alias for Istio control plane revisions.
* `IstioCNI`: Istio's CNI plugin resource.
* `ZTunnel`: ambient mode Ztunnel DaemonSet (alpha feature).

Note that if you are migrating from the [deprecated and deleted] In-Cluster Istio operator, you can check this section in our [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#migrating-from-istio-in-cluster-operator) where we explain the equivalence of resources, or you can try also our [resource converter](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#converter-script) to convert your  IstioOperator resource to an Istio resource easily.

## Main Features and support

> 

Reviewer 3: What's not mentioned in this list is managing the different components of your control plane as a Kubernetes resource. There's a separate CRD for `Istio`, `IstioCNI`, `ZTunnel`, etc. and these pieces can each be managed and upgraded through their respective CRs.

Author: Added a bullet point for this information

- Support for multiple Istio versions.
- Two update strategies are supported: `InPlace` and `RevisionBased`. Check our documentation for more information about the update types supported.
- Support for multicluster Istio [deployment models](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/): multi-primary, primary-remote, external control plane. More information and examples in our [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/README.md#multi-cluster).

> - Support for [multiple mesh](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#multiple-meshes): The Sail Operator supports running multiple meshes on a single cluster and associating each workload with a specific mesh. Each mesh is managed by a separate control plane. More information and examples can be found [here](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/README.md#multiple-meshes-on-a-single-cluster).

Author: Ok

> - [Dual-Stack](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/README.md#dual-stack-support) support since istio `v1.23` version.

Reviewer 3: Again I don't think this is really a Sail Operator feature since all it is doing is passing through the helm values.

- Ambient is alpha: check our specific [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/common/istio-ambient-mode.md).
- Addons are managed separately from the Sail Operator. They can be easily integrated with the Sail operator, you can check this section for the [documentation](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/README.md#addons) for examples and more information.

## Why Now?

As cloud-native architectures continue to evolve, a robust and user-friendly operator for Istio is more essential than ever. The Sail Operator offers developers and operations teams a consistent, secure, and efficient solution that feels familiar to those used to working with operators. Its GA release signals a mature solution, ready to support even the most demanding production environments.

## Try it out

Do you want to try our operator?

> Going over this example will show you how to safely do an update of your istio control plane by using the revision-based upgrade strategy, this means you will have two Istio control planes running at the same time,allowing you to migrate workloads easily, minimizing the risk of traffic disruptions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Going over this example will show you how to safely do an update of your istio control plane by using the revision-based upgrade strategy, this means you will have two Istio control planes running at the same time, allowing you to migrate workloads easily, minimizing the risk of traffic disruptions.
```

Prerequisites:
- Running cluster
- Helm
- Kubectl
- Istioctl

### Install the operator from the sail operator helm repository

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm repo add sail-operator https://istio-ecosystem.github.io/sail-operator
$ helm repo update
$ kubectl create namespace sail-operator
$ helm install sail-operator sail-operator/sail-operator --version 1.0.0 -n sail-operator
{{< /text >}}

The operator is now installed in your cluster:

{{< text plain >}}
NAME: sail-operator
LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar 18 12:00:46 2025
NAMESPACE: sail-operator
STATUS: deployed
REVISION: 1
TEST SUITE: None
{{< /text >}}

> ### Check the operator pod running

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Ensure the operator pod is running
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pods -n sail-operator
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
sail-operator-56bf994f49-j67ft   1/1     Running   0          87s
{{< /text >}}

#### Create an Istio resource with istio version 1.24.2 and a Istio revision tag

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl create ns istio-system
$ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f-
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: Istio
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: istio-system
  updateStrategy:
    type: RevisionBased
    inactiveRevisionDeletionGracePeriodSeconds: 30
  version: v1.24.2
---
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioRevisionTag
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Istio
    name: default
EOF
{{< /text >}}

> Note that `IstioRevisionTag` has target reference to `Istio` resources with name default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the `IstioRevisionTag` has a target reference to the `Istio` resource with the name `default`.
```

Check the state of the resources created:
- `istiod` pods are running

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
istiod-default-v1-24-2-bd8458c4-jl8zm   1/1     Running   0          3m45s
{{< /text >}}

- `Istio` resource created

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istio
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE
default   1           1       1        default-v1-24-2   Healthy   v1.24.2   4m27s
{{< /text >}}

- `IstioRevisionTag` resource created

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istiorevisiontag
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME      STATUS                    IN USE   REVISION          AGE
default   NotReferencedByAnything   False    default-v1-24-2   4m43s
{{< /text >}}

> Note that the `IstioRevisionTag` status is `NotReferencedByAnything`, this is because there is no resource referenced using the revision `default-v1-24-2`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the `IstioRevisionTag` status is `NotReferencedByAnything`, this is because there are currently no resources using the revision `default-v1-24-2`.
```

### Deploy sample application

- Create a namespace and label it to enable istio injection

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl create namespace sample
$ kubectl label namespace sample istio-injection=enabled
{{< /text >}}

> As a result of the label of the namespace you will see that the `IstioRevisionTag` resource status will change to In Use true, this is because there is already one resource making reference to the revision `default-v1-24-2`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After labeling the namespace you will see that the `IstioRevisionTag` resource status will change to In Use true, this is because there is now a resource using the revision `default-v1-24-2`.
```

{{< /text >}}

- Confirm the proxy sidecar version remains the same

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl proxy-status
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                              CLUSTER        CDS                LDS                EDS                RDS                ECDS        ISTIOD                                    VERSION
sleep-5fcd8fd6c8-q4c9x.sample     Kubernetes     SYNCED (6m40s)     SYNCED (6m40s)     SYNCED (6m40s)     SYNCED (6m40s)     IGNORED     istiod-default-v1-24-2-bd8458c4-jl8zm     1.24.2
{{< /text >}}

- Restart the sample pod

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl rollout restart deployment -n sample
{{< /text >}}

- Confirm the proxy sidecar version is updated

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl proxy-status
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                              CLUSTER        CDS              LDS              EDS              RDS              ECDS        ISTIOD                                      VERSION
sleep-6f87fcf556-k9nh9.sample     Kubernetes     SYNCED (29s)     SYNCED (29s)     SYNCED (29s)     SYNCED (29s)     IGNORED     istiod-default-v1-24-3-68df97dfbb-v7ndm     1.24.3
{{< /text >}}

> - When an `IstioRevision` is no longer in use and is not the active revision of an `Istio` resource (for example not the version that is set in the `spec.version` field), the Sail Operator will delete it after a grace period, which defaults to 30 seconds. Confirm the deletion of the old control plane and `IstioRevision`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- When an `IstioRevision` is no longer in use and is not the active revision of an `Istio` resource (for example, when it is not the version that is set in the `spec.version` field), the Sail Operator will delete it after a grace period, which defaults to 30 seconds. Confirm the deletion of the old control plane and `IstioRevision`:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
istiod-default-v1-24-3-68df97dfbb-v7ndm   1/1     Running   0          10m
{{< /text >}}

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istiorevision
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME              TYPE   READY   STATUS    IN USE   VERSION   AGE
default-v1-24-3          True    Healthy   True     v1.24.3   13m
{{< /text >}}

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get istio
{{< /text >}}

{{< text plain >}}
NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE
default   1           1       1        default-v1-24-3   Healthy   v1.24.3   24m
{{< /text >}}

## Conclusion

> The Sail Operator automates manual tasks, ensuring a consistent, reliable, and uncomplicated experience from initial installation to ongoing maintenance and upgrades of Istio versions in your cluster. The Sail Operator is a project part of the istio-ecosystem organization, and we encourage you to try it out and provide feedback to help us improve it, you can check our contribution guide [here](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information about how to contribute to the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Sail Operator automates manual tasks, ensuring a consistent, reliable, and uncomplicated experience from initial installation to ongoing maintenance and upgrades of Istio in your cluster. The Sail Operator is an istio-ecosystem project, and we encourage you to try it out and provide feedback to help us improve it, you can check our contribution guide [here](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information about how to contribute to the project.
```
